wait do I have to laugh if it's not
funny like you don't have to laugh no
okay this is not some like stalinist
dictatorship this is not Mara Lago
express your true
[Music]
opinions from New York Times opinion I'm
Ross doit and this is matter of opinion
[Music]
I'm joined this week by my colleague and
fellow columnist David French hey David
Ross it's great to be with you I'm so
glad you could be with me because this
is kind of a funny situation we actually
yes you can laugh yeah no I'm already
laughing Ross I'm already laughing God
laughs at all podcasting plans and so
apparently does Donald Trump because we
actually taped an entire matter of
opinion episode earlier this week
talking about what second Trump
Administration might look like with a
lot of discussion of what was then a
rush of White House cabinet appointments
and nominations but then no sooner had
we finished taping the episode than
President elect Trump announced two more
really big ones Florida Congressman Matt
gates for attorney general and former
congresswoman tulsey gabard for Director
of National Intelligence and we thought
we had to talk about this and
unfortunately Carlos and Michelle are
you know have escaped to a beach
somewhere I assume so I was left alone
but I knew I could count on you David
with your law and foreign policy
background and your deep Devotion to
Matt gates to talk about these picks in
particular and what they say about how
Trump intends to govern um so that's
what we're going to talk about well I'm
always warming up in the bullpen Ross
you just have to give the sign you're
the Dan quizenberry
of um of trump era podcasting okay that
was a deep that was a deep cut for our
Kansas City audience hi Kansas City I
appreciate it yep so and one final note
we are taping Thursday afternoon this
episode God willing uh through the
ministrations of our harried producers
will be out Friday morning but God knows
what will happen in the next 5 hours so
we apologize for any news we've missed
so let's start with the gates
appointment David he is notable
unsurprisingly for a attorney general
pick for being one of Donald Trump's
allies and fierce Defenders um is there
anything else you would say that he's
known
for well yeah uh you would say that he
is known for being investigated for
allegedly having sexual relations with
an underage girl he is known for
allegedly uh speaking quite openly and
proudly about his sexual exploits
including allegedly showing pictures of
women that he slept with nude pictures
to colleagues he is definitely also
known for disrupting the house rather
dramatically when he initiated the coup
that toppled the house Speaker after the
2022 midterms when ultimately leading to
Mike Johnson being the current Speaker
of the House and I guess the best way to
describe him Ross is that he is a purely
pugilistic political figure and a
extraordinarily
libertine personal figure who by the way
has barely any legal experience at all
let's just throw that in there he has a
law degree which is more than I have
right yes came at a law school practiced
for around two years uh before he then
uh entered the Florida legislature so he
may be one of the least qualified
attorney general nominees ever just on
the basis of his experience or lack
thereof in addition to these other
things that I talked about yes yes the
the other things are um notable bad
gross yes no no he's I think it's fair
to say that he's known for being a gross
figure there is a house ethics
investigation involving him which the
house Ethics Committee was set to vote
on Friday on whether to release their
report but now that release is suspended
because Gates has resigned from the
house which has led to various
complicated theories about how he isn't
n really trying to be attorney general
that this was some sort of favor from
Trump to him that let him leave the
house to set himself up for his next
political act but that sort of
six-dimensional Chess Theory runs a
ground on you know a certain amount of
reporting just in the last 24 hours from
people saying no look you know obviously
it's a open question whether he can be
confirmed but Trump definitely wants him
to be confirmed and that reporting in
includes a I think a particularly
striking quote from Mark Caputo a
Floridian reporter who now reports for
the bull workk he had a quote basically
from a trump adviser an anonymous quote
saying none of the other candidates none
of the attorneys had what Trump wants
and they didn't talk like Gates the
adviser said everyone else looked at AG
as if they were applying for a Judicial
appointment they talked about their vaed
legal theories and constitutional
pardon my language Gates was
the only one who said yeah I'll go over
there and start cutting fword deleted
heads so clearly that's what Donald
Trump wants from this
appointment um what do you think's going
to happen
next that's a great question Ross
because it's very clear uh from some of
the early reporting that a number of
Senators are shall we say skeptical of
this appointment but there is also
another Factor looming in the background
which which is okay wait a minute um if
it's not bat Gates who is it is it Ken
Paxton the Texas Attorney General who's
under investigation himself so there is
a lot of concern that what this pick is
is a signal of this is the kind of
person Trump wants as an attorney
general pick and he's just going to keep
voling up to us the same kind of person
however if the Senate is going to
exercise a true advise and consent not
just consent but advise and consent role
here it should be able to stand up and
say this person is grotesquely
unqualified we need to see the American
people need to see this house ethics
report before there's a single vote in
the Senate but I you know Ross this is a
going to be a big test for Senate
Republicans the question is how much are
they going to view themselves as team
Trump versus how much are they going to
adopt the role Envision for them in the
process by the founders as an IND
dependent check on Trump and that's the
question and right now I'm not that
optimistic that they're going to act as
a check as opposed to act as team
members and so the other thing that I
want to mention about him just real
briefly there's no indication from Matt
Gates's career that he is just even
competent enough to run an organization
like this one of the reasons the
American people are so negative about
American institutions is because of a
sheer lack of competence that is
consistently displayed in American
institutions and the last name that I
would think of to say write the ship on
a massive complex organization to just
make it competent and good at his job
that last name that comes to my mind is
Matt Gates yeah so let me put a couple
points to you on on those questions so I
I agree that Gates has no as far as I
can tell relevant manager
experience that would be relevant to
running the Department of Justice I do
think that Gates is smart I think that
he is a sort of Savvy tactical
politician who is sort of different
categorically in certain ways from some
of his sort of Maga esque allies in the
house I think he has more Savvy and more
sense of what he's actually doing for
better or worse I do think he has
somewhat of a kind of principled issue
profile interestingly that is kind of
you know he is a libertine obviously and
it's sort of a Libertarian issue profile
he's a Libertarian in his voting record
on you know everything from drug policy
to surveillance these kind of things
it's sort of an interesting mix so I
just wanted to mention those two things
because they are I think part of the
gates package and relevant to sort of
thinking about what he might be thinking
here um but then I think from the start
from the point of view of people worried
about abuses of power in a second Trump
term the Attorney General office has
obviously been kind of a reasonable
locus of anxiety right like yes Trump
campaigned on the premise that the
Department of Justice was politicized
and weaponized against him and that he
was going to sort of act against it you
know that there would be purges and
heads would role and so on with the sort
of further implication I think that a
lot of people drew that the doj would be
used against his political enemies as he
felt it was used against him now if that
is your major concern about what might
happen with the doj obviously there is a
sort of high-minded institutionalist
case that Matt gate should not be
attorney general I do Wonder though
maybe I'm being a perverse here but I do
wonder if that is your worry in a way
are you maybe not better off with a sort
of lightning rod performative showman
bound really tightly to Trump without
significant institutional experience in
that role as opposed to a more
conventional figure who we can assume
could only get the job if he'd promised
certain things to Trump but might
actually be a little bit more effective
at using the doj inappropriately for
Trump's ends like can you see sort of
from a point of view of not wanting a
successfully politicized
doj I can almost see a case for just
like yeah this is the kind of person
Trump is sending up he campaigned on
this let's see how it goes so in other
words the incompetence is a feature not
a bug um incompetence but also like
there is no sort of tissue of you know
neutrality around Gates Right you I mean
there's always a certain illusion around
the neutrality of the doj attorney
generals are always to some extent
creatures of the presidency Janet Reno
was not actually independent of Bill
Clinton and so on right so so Trump
wants to go further even maybe than you
know the president's brother as attorney
general era that the kennedies gave us
right he he wants a true creature okay
don't you want that to be sort of naked
and overt so that the public can judge
it fully rather than again someone who's
draping it in some kind of
constitutional theorizing Ross you're
getting to I think which is going to be
one of the key questions of the Trump
administ
which is how much should people try to
throw their bodies in front of obviously
terrible decisions and so you had 2017
2018 2019 you had a culture in the White
House and in the larger government where
people were throwing their bodies in
front of what they viewed to be
impulsive or catastrophic or terrible
Trump decisions and then by 2020 a lot
of those people had been kind of cleared
out and then you're beginning to get a
lot of the same kind of conversation now
okay should the Senate just go ahead and
confirm him so that the American people
can see what the Trump vision is for the
doj isn't that what they should do
should they stop throwing their bodies
in front of bad decisions and my bias is
you throw your body in front of the bad
decision because the bad decision can
have terrible consequences the
counterargument to that is well it's the
consequences of the bad decision that
move us through this moment um I don't
know that there's a perfect answer to
that but I do think wherever the line is
of when the Senate should say Trump gets
his way versus we're going to assert our
independent judgment wherever that line
is it's far removed from this guy from
Matt Gates this is the kind of pick that
I don't even know why the Senate has an
advising role if it's just going to roll
over for this person right and one of
the things I mean you've had a lot of
commentary on this from people saying
Trump is you know he's owning the libs
it started the lib Bing has begun and in
the case of gates as far as I can tell
the people being owned are all of the
Republicans who hate him yeah liberals
obviously don't like Matt Gates but I
think he's more of a kind of hate figure
inside the Republican caucus yes than
than he is like on
MSNBC I think right now you have Trump
is giving Senate Republicans in an odd
way an out right like John Corin I think
just before we recorded this said
something to the effect of well we need
to see at least see what's in the ethics
report right so they may not I it's
totally possible Gates gets confirmed
but they can just reject him and say
we're Protecting President Trump from
Gates's own bad character right so that
may be where this goes which but which
again leaves open the underlying
question of how beholden an AG should be
to the president um all right speaking
of areas where Trump appointees have
tended to if not throw their bodies uh
in front of the president at least steer
the president in the past when we come
back we're going to talk first about the
tulsey gabard appointment but more
generally about the array of foreign
policy picks Trump has made and what
they tell us so stay with us we'll be
right back
[Music]
and we're back so we're going to turn
from president-elect Trump's attorney
general pick to his foreign policy pick
along with Matt gates for attorney
general the big pick at the same time
was former democratic congresswoman
telsey gabard for Director of National
intelligence I think clearly a kind of
gesture to what you might call the you
know
antici wing of the Republican party also
sort of anti-interventionist
paleoconservative isolationist you can
choose your term gabard is only one of a
number of foreign policy picks that
Trump has made and these include Marco
Rubio for Secretary of State Florida
representative Mike Waltz for National
Security adviser congresswoman at leise
stonic for un Ambassador and uh maybe
most notably in terms of it being a
trumpian surprise the Fox News host and
combat veteran Pete hegseth for
Secretary of Defense right so David
before the heg Seth pick certainly and
before the gabard pick as well the
foreign policy pick struck me as
essentially a repre of Trump's first
term where what he did in foreign policy
was not pick figures associated with
trumpian populism directly obviously all
of the figures involved have adapted
themselves to trumpism but they they on
foreign policy Rubio Waltz and stefanic
are all what I would refer to and maybe
you disagree as kind of mainstream
Republican foreign policy Hawks and in
his first term Trump Trump basically
worked his own kind of amoral realist
calculations through a foreign policy
team that was more conventional in its
views and it seems like that could be
happening again now heg Seth is a
different case and Gabbert is a
different case but I wanted to give that
reaction and see what you thought about
it yeah I I would agree with that so I
live in this neighborhood my
neighborhood is 85% Republicans so I'm
I'm living in a very very red part of
America and so I talk to Trump
supporters just all the time in course
of my daily life and what's really
interesting is sort of seeing the the
dichotomy between Maga and what you
might call Normy Republican and Normie
Republican basically takes the view that
the real Donald Trump is the Donald
Trump of 2017 2018 2019 that's with Rex
Tillerson as Secretary of State at the
start Mattis McMaster Kelly and they
look back at that time and they they're
nostalgic for it and so they looked at
the 2024 election where Trump was saying
pretty radical things about foreign
policy pretty radical things on a lot of
fronts and saying he doesn't mean that
that's just Trump being Trump that's
Trump's Bluster and those folks who
believe that looked at The Pick of Rubio
in particular stefanic as well and said
look these are mainstream Republicans
this is not an unusual crazy out there
Administration these are mainstream
Republicans and then you saw some
consternation from Maga which had heard
all the campaign rhetoric and said oh we
want him to do all that that's exactly
what we want so part of his Coalition is
voting for him saying nah he's not going
to do what he says another whole part of
this Coalition is voting for him and
saying yeah we want him to do exactly
what he says and so I felt like the
Rubio stonic picks were much more in
line with that kind of Normy Republican
view of trump which is lots of Bluster
but at the end of the day he's still
broadly a republican as we understand
Republicans and so I think the Rubio
pick in particular amongst all of them
sent that signal and so it was a very
interesting first of the big picks to
come out and then you saw it Ross I'm
sure you saw it that backlash on Maga
what from Maga what are you doing with
Rubio and then Here Comes gabard Here
Comes heith which is these are two very
different picks from Rubio and
stepanic well let's talk about what
makes them different because I feel like
so to me gabard is ideolog Al different
like to the extent that she sort of
belongs to the Republican party now she
belongs to the to the Ron Paul wing of
the Republican party which is intensely
anti-interventionist
intensely skeptical of the National
Security State and you know just
fundamentally ideologically different
from AR Rubio Heth I think is a a more
complicated case where he is a guy who
sort of began his career as part of a
group of veterans advocating in defense
of the surge in Iraq in the George W
bush era he ended up as a Fox News host
and in aect has become sort of very
aggressively populist aggressively
trumpian you know if you look at things
he said in the Trump era he was more
hawkish than Trump at some points on
Iran and other things I don't think he
fits neatly into the kind of ideological
category as gabard I think it's more
that he's doesn't have normal foreign
policy experience is much more of sort
of a tattooed TV figure with you know
substantial military experience who who
if I'm reading it is there to sort of
fight a culture war in the Pentagon you
know against wokeness Dei initiatives
and I think that there are people in
Trump's orbit who imagine that the US
can address honestly address its
recruiting shortfalls if we have a sort
of Marshall figure with combat
experience a sort of tough guy figure as
as Secretary of Defense which again is
maybe a bad idea it's quite different
from gabard but what do you think yeah
well let me start with gabard I mean
when it comes to gabard I see her in
many ways as the worst pick than heith
uh gabard isn't just a Ron paulite
figure she's a Ron paulite figure if Ron
Paul seemed to really have an affection
for Assad and Syria and seem to have
some much more sympathies to sort of the
Vladimir Putin View of international
relations and international Affairs very
hostile to Ukraine in a way that Marco
Rubio for example never would be but the
the way that Pete Heth has never shown
so I think when you're talking about
Tulsi gabard you're talking about
somebody with a world view about
America's role in the world a worldview
about the defense establishment a
worldview that it's about as far from
conventional Republican as you can
imagine it is extraordinarily different
from conventional Republican um hexus is
a different case so you know I I've seen
a lot of opposition to him none of that
opposition should center around his
military record his military record is
Sterling I mean he served his country
honorably he served his country
courageously the critique that I have
around him is similar to one of the
critiques that I had around Matt Gates
why are we giving the keys to these vast
institutions to people who have no
experience running virtually any kind of
institution at all for one thing so
again we're going to that competence
point you cannot equate ideology and
competence they're not the same thing
you can like someone's ideology but if
they don't have this record of
accomplishment that indicates they're
ready for this role I mean think about
it this way you know if you are running
a multinational corporation you're
running
Boeing do you hire a CNBC host to run
Boeing if they've never run a company
that would be a dangerous move that
would be a dangerous hire so I I think
here with heith what you're looking at
is yeah he has an ideological view I
would put it as he's more like an avatar
of Christian Maga he has Crusader
tattoos The deas Vault tattoo so he's a
TV host he's served bravely and
honorably but Ross I could tell you five
six guys I served with in Iraq who are
far more qualified to be se de than he
is right no I mean he's he has done some
policy work um worked for veterans
organizations was sort of touted briefly
in the first term as a potential
Secretary for Veterans Affairs so he's
not without some let's say sort of
interest in military policy but yes he
has no relevant executive experience and
I mean at a moment when the Pentagon
obviously everyone on the rightward side
of the political Spectrum thinks you
know the Pentagon needs to be shifted in
various ways to meet the Chinese threat
to meet the multi-polar world you would
have to imagine that he could only
succeed if his under secretaries were
all amazing bureaucrats basically right
right exactly which you know is not
impossible but does not seem especially
likely to be the case all right I want
to pull up from both of these questions
and talk about what generally we're
learning about the Trump governing style
so far but we'll talk about that and
finish up when we come back stay with us
[Music]
and we're back so we've talked about the
attorney general pick we've talked about
the foreign policy picks I want to just
pull up we're you know what a week a
week and two days into the preamble to
the second Trump
Administration what can we say
generally David about what we're seeing
is this time different are we just doing
four years of the same trumpan style
what do you think oh it's it's beginning
differently than it did last time I mean
I vividly remember in November 2016
moving into December 2016 one of the
first things that you saw was Trump
bringing in a parade of some of the most
respected people in Republican politics
some of the most respected people in the
military he was bringing in a parade of
people who had a calming effect on the
American people um not entirely of
course we know it was a very chaotic
time then
too I don't remember being that calm but
but sure yeah okay but I didn't know who
Trump would nominate and if you're going
to nominate General Mattis if you're
going to nominate I didn't love the Rex
Tillerson pick but he's a very serious
person so if you're going to nominate
Mattis Tillerson McMaster Kelly these
are all very very serious people and so
from the get-go a lot of the alarmism
around Trump to a lot of Republicans was
already seen as overblown because look
does General Mattis work for a dangerous
man does HR McMaster I mean you could go
down the list and then here what you're
seeing is he's going ahead and just
running straight to the
2020 chaotic Trump he's just stampeding
straight there and so that 2020 chaotic
Trump was surrounding himself with
cranks and Fringe figures and that's
exactly what he's doing with some not
all of these cabinet appointments so
what we're seeing is as as I said
earlier it's just the continuation of
the 2020
2021 Lurch into what you might call more
pure
trumpism so I I just want to though
focus on what to me is sort of the the
difference right you said some but not
all of the picks to me it seems like by
picking Matt Gates Trump is telling
telling us that he means to be sort of
personally intensely invested in the
Trump fication whatever that may mean of
the Department of Justice and you know
related things by picking Marco Rubio
Mike Waltz along with telsey gabard and
gabard in an important but a role that
is not as historically important in
setting foreign policy as Secretary of
State that says to me that on foreign
policy there's of a full trumpian agenda
that he's just going to push through and
it's more that he is in effect doing
something similar to the first term but
he has a different Coalition now and
he's ensuring basically that he's got
you know a group of conventional
Republicans plus a representative of
we'll call it the like anti-war right
for one of a better term in gabard plus
whatever heg Seth is but that seems to
me quite different and if you're looking
for reassurance I would rather get the
full Trump ification in domestic policy
than in foreign policy right now and and
I don't think you know I think we would
disagree slightly maybe more than
slightly I don't think it's a bad thing
to have a foreign policy team with
someone with you know what you would
consider somewhat Fringe views in the
room for for debates I would not want
gabard as Secretary of State but gabard
in the room does not alarm me that much
I I I will say that of the picks I don't
like the gabard pick at all um utterly
opposed to the gab very very anti- David
French pick yes yeah there's no nothing
about the gabard pick no you know
there's nothing about her cozing up to
Assad there's nothing about her comments
about Russia and Ukraine nothing about
that I think that that I'm entirely in
disagreement with that but I will agree
with you she is less dangerous at where
she is than if she was Secretary of
state for example or Secretary of
Defense and um and I'm also going to
agree with you that the full Trump
ification of domestic policy is also
less menacing than the full Trump
ification of foreign policy because
there are multiple checks that you can
impose on a president domestically he
has a much more free hand much more free
hand in foreign policy and so that Trump
ification domestically is much easier to
oppose in concrete and specific ways
compared to if he wants to just cut off
Ukraine he can cut off Ukraine he can
just do that and so um I I think that
you know I'm going to agree with you on
that yeah I mean to me this looks like a
foreign policy team that like the last
foreign policy team he's going to you
know make requests and they're going to
end up presenting him with a bunch of
different options that steer him in One
Direction or another and my concern as
someone who is um I think you know
somewhat less hawkish than you or more
concerned conc erned about American
overstretch is actually that this team
while it has in gabed again a sort of
anti-war figure it lacks a kind of
realist Center like someone who has a
strategic vision of how America is going
to rebalance itself in the world right
now I don't I don't see that appointment
I see sort of more I mean maybe Rubio
has ideas along those lines but I see
more sort of conventional you know we
Face our enemies wherever they are
Republican thinking Plus I mean who
knows who knows what Pete Heth will
represent so can I I I know I'm a moo
guest and not a moo host can I ask a mu
host a question yes um does JD Vance
play a role in foreign policy do you see
him as providing some sort of ballast on
foreign policy in a trump Administration
uh what kind of portfolio do you see him
having because he's obviously much less
hawkish on Ukraine than I am for example
but right how much of a role does he
play in the Trump Administration do you
foresee I honestly I I wish I could tell
you that I can see through the veil and
call up the future vice president and
have him tell me but I have no special
Insight my sense from these picks would
be that he is not exerting strong
influence over foreign policy I mean he
defined himself to me and the interview
I I did with him as a realist I don't
think he defines himself where Gabbert
is right and
I think he's on has a good relationship
with Rubio in the Senate but obviously
they have differences on foreign policy
so I I think the Vance role remains to
be seen but the the one other thing
about Vance is that we haven't seen a
lot of Economic Policy appointments from
Trump as yet and you would expect
Vance's sort of populist side to have
potentially some influence on those
certainly I think the people who for
good or ill were like you know well
Vance is going to end up being the
brains of this white house I mean we
haven't even talked about Elon Musk and
his role but I would say that the real
my my take away at the moment especially
from the gates pick and the heg Seth
pick and the way that these picks are
being made sort of the the way they seem
like a surprise even to people on
Trump's team is the real continuity with
the first term is there's no JD Vance is
the secret brain Elon Musk you know this
is Donald Trump's Administration yes
there may be a JD Vance Administration
someday but this is for now just the
Trump Administration Redux with all that
that may entail and on that note um I'm
being handed a note no I'm not being
handed a note because I don't have
anyone here to hand me one but I would
be remiss if I did not mention that as
we conclude this recording there is
breaking news and a political report
that Robert F Kennedy Jr will indeed be
put forward as Secretary of Health and
Human Services another lightning rod
controversial Trump being Trump kind of
pick that I wish we could talk about now
David but I and Ross I thought they
couldn't get worse than Matt Gates
ah all right well that's that's a strong
statement and um I imagine that this
show will have many more opportunities
to talk about all of these characters
and all of these issues and I'm sure
that we will have you back at some point
soon to do so so thank you again David
for joining me in a pinch and we'll talk
again soon thanks so much Ross
[Music]
thanks so much for joining our
conversation give matter of opinion a
follow on your favorite podcast app and
leave us a nice review while you're
there to let other people know why they
should listen do you have a question for
US based on something we talked about
today we want to hear it share it with
us in a voicemail by calling
7440 and we might just respond to it in
an upcoming
episode you can also email us at matter
of opinion atny
times.com matter of opinion is produced
by Sophia Alvarez Boyd phe Le and Andrea
banzos it's edited by Jordana hulman our
fact check team is Kate Sinclair Mary
Marge locker and Michelle Harris
original music by Isaac Jones aim
Shapiro Carol saboro Sonia Herrero and
Pat macuser mixing by Carol Sabo
audience strategy by Shannon busta and
Christina
samuli our executive producer is Annie
Rose straser